initial swipe at concepts doc, big thanks to @rickducott for his blog post (#508)
solo-io/service-mesh-hub: docs/content/concepts/_index.md

---
title: "Concepts"
menuTitle: Concepts
description: Understanding Service Mesh Hub Concepts
weight: 25
---

> Service Mesh Hub (SMH) is a management plane for service mesh to simplify operations and workflows of service mesh across multiple clusters and deployment footprints. With SMH, you can install, discover, and operate a service-mesh deployment across your enterprise deployed on on premises or in the cloud, even across heterogeneous service-mesh implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service Mesh Hub (SMH) is a management plane that simplifies operations and workflows of service meshes across multiple clusters and deployment footprints. With SMH, you can install, discover, and operate a service-mesh deployment across your enterprise deployed on-premises or in the cloud, even across heterogeneous service-mesh implementations.
```

## Why Service Mesh Hub

A service mesh provides powerful service-to-service communication capabilities like request routing, traffic observability, transport security, policy enforcement and more. A service mesh brings its highest value when many services (as many as possible) take advantage of its traffic control capabilities. In today's modern cloud deployments, both on-premises and in a public cloud, the expectation is that more, smaller clusters or deployment targets are preferred for the following reasons:

* fault tolerance
* compliance and data access
* disaster recovery
* scaling needs
* geographic needs

Managing a service mesh across this heterogeneous landscape that is consistent and secure is tedious and error prone at best. Service Mesh Hub provides a single unified pane of glass driven by a declarative API (CRDs in Kubernetes) that orchestrates and simplifies the operation of a multi-cluster service mesh. 

## A multi-cluster management plane

> Service Mesh Hub (SMH) consists of a set of components that run on a single cluster, often referred to as your *management plane cluster*. The management plane components are stateless and rely exclusively on declarative CRDs.  Each service-mesh installation that spans a deployment footprint often has its own control plane. You can think if SMH as a management plane for multiple control planes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Service Mesh Hub  consists of a set of components that run on a single cluster, often referred to as your *management plane cluster*. The management plane components are stateless and rely exclusively on declarative CRDs.  Each service-mesh installation that spans a deployment footprint often has its own control plane. You can think of Service Mesh Hub as a management plane for multiple control planes.
```

> You can register a cluster with Service Mesh Hub, and it will handle the communications with other clusters - discovering what is running, pushing out configurations, unifying the trust model, scraping metrics, and more. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can register a cluster with Service Mesh Hub, and it will handle the communication with other clusters - discovering what is running, pushing out configurations, unifying the trust model, scraping metrics, and more. 
```

> You can register a cluster with Service Mesh Hub, and it will handle the communications with other clusters - discovering what is running, pushing out configurations, unifying the trust model, scraping metrics, and more. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a cluster is registered with Service Mesh Hub, it can start managing that cluster - discovering running service mesh entities, pushing out configurations, unifying the trust model, scraping metrics, and more.
```

## Concepts

### Discovery

When a cluster is registered, Service Mesh Hub starts discovery. The first task of discovery is to find any service meshes that are installed on the cluster. When it finds the control plane for a service mesh, discovery will write a `Mesh` resource to the management plane cluster, linked to the `KubernetesCluster` resource that was written during cluster registration. Currently, Service Mesh Hub discovers and manages [Istio](https://istio.io) and [Linkerd](https://linkerd.io) meshes, with plans to support more in the near future.

`Discovery` then looks for workloads that are associated with the mesh, such as a deployment that has created a pod that is injected with the sidecar proxy for that mesh. It will write a MeshWorkload resource to the management plane cluster representing this workload. 

Finally, discovery also looks for services that are exposing the workloads of a mesh, and as before, writes a `MeshService` resource to the management plane cluster. 

At this point, the management plane has a complete view of the meshes, services, and workloads across your multi-cluster, multi-mesh environment. 

### Virtual Meshes

> In order to enable multi-cluster configuration, users will group multiple meshes together into an object called a `VirtualMesh`. The virtual mesh contains a few pieces of configuration that facilitate cross-cluster communications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to enable multi-cluster configuration, users will group multiple meshes together into an object called a `VirtualMesh`. The virtual mesh exposes configuration to facilitate cross-cluster communications. 
```

### Traffic and Access Policies

Service Mesh Hub enables users to write simple configuration objects to the management plane to enact traffic and access policies between services. It was designed to be translated into the underlying mesh config, while abstracting away the mesh-specific complexity from the user. 

A `TrafficPolicy` applies between a set of sources (mesh workloads) and destinations (mesh services), and is used to describe rules like “when A sends POST requests to B, add a header and set the timeout to 10 seconds”. Or “for every request to services on cluster C, increase the timeout and add retries”. As of this release, traffic policies support timeouts, retries, cors, traffic shifting, header manipulation, fault injection, subset routing, weighted destinations, and more. Note that some meshes don’t support all of these features; Service Mesh Hub will translate as best it can into the underlying mesh configuration, or report an error back to the user. 

> An `AccessPolicy` also applies between sources (this time representing identities) and destinations, and are used to finely control which services are allowed to communicate. On the virtual mesh, a user can specify a global policy to restrict access, and require users to specify access policies in order to enable communication to services. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An `AccessControlPolicy` also applies between sources (this time representing identities) and destinations, and are used to finely control which services are allowed to communicate. On the virtual mesh, a user can specify a global policy to restrict access, and require users to specify access policies in order to enable communication to services. 
```

With traffic and access policies, Service Mesh Hub gives users a powerful language to dictate how services should communicate, even within complex multi-cluster, multi-mesh applications. 

### CLI Tooling

> Service Mesh Hub is tackling really hard problems related to multi-cluster networking and configuration, so to speed up your learning curve it comes with a command line tool called `meshctl`. This tool provides interactive commands to make it easier to author your first virtual mesh, register a cluster, or create a traffic or access policy. Once you’ve authored config, it also has a `describe` command to help understand how your workloads and services are affected by your policies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service Mesh Hub is tackling really hard problems related to multi-cluster networking and configuration, so to speed up your learning it comes with a command line tool called `meshctl`. This tool provides interactive commands to make it easier to author your first virtual mesh, register a cluster, or create a traffic or access policy. Once you’ve authored config, it also has a `describe` command to help understand how your workloads and services are affected by your policies. 
```
